CHAPTER III.
We ought to consider not only that our life is daily wasting away, and a smaller part
of it is left, but another thing also must be taken into account, that if a man should
live longer, it is quite uncertain whether the understanding will still continue sufficient
for the comprehension of things, and retain the power of contemplation which strives to
acquire the knowledge of the Divine and the human.
For if he shall begin to fall into dotage, perspiration and nutrition, and imagination
and appetite, and whatever else there is of the kind, will not fail.
But the power of making use of ourselves, and filling up the measure of our duty, and
clearly separating all appearances, and considering whether a man should now depart from life,
and whatever else of the kind absolutely requires a disciplined reason, all this is already
extinguished.
We must make haste then, not only because we are daily nearer to death, but also because
the conception of things and the understanding of them cease first.
2. We ought to observe also that even the things which follow after the things which
are produced according to nature, contain something pleasing and attractive. For instance,
when bread is baked some parts are split at the surface, and these parts which thus open
and have a certain fashion contrary to the purpose of the baker's art, are beautiful
in a manner, and in a peculiar way excite a desire for eating. And again figs, when
they are quite ripe, gape open, and in the ripe olives the very circumstance that they
are being near to rottenness adds a peculiar beauty to the fruit. And the ears of corn
bending down, and the lion's eyebrows, and the foam which flows from the mouth of wild
boars, and many other things, though they are far from being beautiful, if a man should
examine them severally, still, because they are consequent upon the things which are formed
by nature, help to adorn them, and they please the mind. So that if a man should have a feeling
and a deeper insight with respect to the things which are produced in the universe, there
is hardly one of those which follow by way of consequence which will not seem to him
to be in a manner disposed so as to give pleasure. And so he will see even the real gaping jaws
of wild beasts with no less pleasure than those which painters and sculptors show by
imitation. And in an old woman and an old man he will be able to see a certain maturity
and comeliness, and the attractive loveliness of young persons he will be able to look on
with chaste eyes, and many such things will present themselves, not pleasing to every
man, but to him only who has become truly familiar with nature and her works.
3. Hippocrates, after curing many diseases, himself fell sick and died. The Childi foretold
them deaths of many and then fate caught them too. Alexander and Pompeius and Caius Caesar,
after so often completely destroying whole cities and in battle cutting to pieces many
tens of thousands of cavalry and infantry, themselves too at last departed from life.
Heraclitus, after so many speculations on the conflagration of the universe, was filled
with water internally and died smeared all over with mud. And lice destroyed Democritus
and other lice killed Socrates. What means all this? Thou hast embarked, thou hast made
the voyage, thou art come to shore, get out. If indeed to another life there is no want
of gods, not even there. But it to state without sensation, thou wilt cease to be held by
pains and pleasures, and to be a slave to the vessel which is as much inferior as that
which serves it is superior. For the one is intelligence and deity, the other is earth
and corruption. 4. Do not waste the remainder of thy life
in thoughts about others, when thou dost not refer thy thoughts to some object of common
utility, for thou losest the opportunity of doing something else when thou hast such thoughts
as these. What is such a person doing, and why, and what is he saying, and what is he
thinking of, and what is he contriving, and whatever else of the kind makes us wander
away from the observation of our own ruling power? We ought then to check in the series
of our thoughts everything that is without a purpose and useless. But most of all the
over-curious feeling and the malignant, and a man should use himself to think of those
things only about which if one should suddenly ask, What hast thou now in thy thoughts? With
perfect openness thou mightest immediately answer, This or that, so that from thy words
it should be plain that everything in thee is simple and benevolent, and such as befits
a social animal, one that cares not for thoughts about pleasure or sensual enjoyments at all,
nor has any rivalry or envy and suspicion, or anything else for which thou wouldst blush
if thou shouldst say that thou hadst it in thy mind. For the man who is such and no longer
delays being among the number of the best, is like a priest and minister of the gods,
using to the deity which is planted within him, which makes the man uncontaminated by
pleasure, unharmed by any pain, untouched by any insult, feeling no wrong, a fighter
in the noblest fight, one who cannot be overpowered by any passion, died deep with justice, accepting
with all his soul everything which happens and is assigned to him as his position, and
not even, nor yet without great necessity and for the general interest, imagining what
another says or does or thinks. For it is only what belongs to himself that he makes
the matter for his activity, and he constantly thinks of that which is allotted to himself
out of the sum total of things, and he makes his own act fair, and he is persuaded that
his own portion is good. For the lot which is assigned to each man is carried along with
him and carries him along with it, and he remembers also that every rational animal
is his kinsman, and that to care for all men is according to man's nature, and a man should
hold on to the opinion not of all but of those only who confessedly live according to nature.
But as to those who live not so, he always bears in mind what kind of men they are both
at home and from home, both by night and by day, and what they are and with what men they
live an impure life. Accordingly, he does not value at all the praise which comes from
such men, since they are not even satisfied with themselves.
5. Labour not unwillingly, nor without regard to common interest, nor without due consideration,
nor with destruction, nor let studied ornaments set off thy thoughts, and be not either a
man of many words or busy about too many things, and further let the deity which is in thee
be the guardian of a living being, manly and of ripe age and engaged in matter political,
and a Roman and a ruler who has taken his post like a man waiting for the signal which
summons him from life and ready to go, having need neither of oath nor of any man's testimony.
Be cheerful also, and seek not external help nor the tranquillity which others give. A
man must stand erect, not be kept erect by others.
6. If thou findest in human life anything better than justice, truth, temperance, fortitude,
and in a word anything better than thy own mind's self-satisfaction in the things which
it enables thee to do according to right reason and in the condition that is assigned to thee
without thy own choice. If, I say, thou seest anything better than this, turn to it with
all thy soul, and enjoy that which thou hast found to be the best. But if nothing appears
to be better than the deity which is planted in thee, which has subjected to itself all
thy appetites and carefully examines all the impressions, and as Socrates said, has detached
itself from the persuasions of sense, and has submitted itself to the gods and cares
for mankind, if thou findest everything else smaller and of less value than this, give
place to nothing else. For if thou dost once diverge and incline to it, thou wilt no longer
without distraction be able to give the preference to that good thing which is thy proper possession
and thy own. For it is not right that anything of any other kind, such as praise from the
many, or power, or enjoyment of pleasure, should come into competition with that which
is rationally and politically or practically good. All these things, even though they may
seem to adapt themselves to the better things, in a small degree, obtain the superiority
all at once and carry us away. But do thou, I say, simply and freely choose the better
and hold to it. But that which is useful is better. Well then, if it is only useful to
thee as a rational being, keep to it. But if it is only useful to thee as an animal,
say so and maintain thy judgment without arrogance. Only take care that thou makest the inquiry
by a sure method.
7. Never value anything as profitable to thyself which shall compel thee to break thy promise.
To lose thy self-respect, to hate any man, to suspect, to curse, to act the hypocrite,
to desire anything which needs walls and curtains. For he who has preferred to everything else
of his own intelligence and the demon and the worship of its excellence acts no tragic
part, does not groan, will not need either solitude or much company. And what is chief
of all, he will live without either pursuing or flying from death. But whether for a longer
or a shorter time he shall have the soul enclosed in the body, he cares not at all. For even
if he must depart immediately, he will go as readily as if he were going to do anything
else which can be done with decency and order. Taking care of this only all through life,
that his thoughts turn not away from anything which belongs to an intelligent animal and
a member of a civil community.
8. In the mind of one who is chastened and purified, thou wilt find no corrupt matter,
no impurity, nor any sore skinned over. Nor is his life incomplete when fate overtakes
him, as one may say of an actor who leaves the stage before ending and finishing the
play. Besides, there is in him nothing servile, nor affected, nor too closely bound to other
things, nor yet detached from other things. Nothing worthy of blame, nothing which seeks
a hiding place.
9. Reverence the faculty which produces opinion. On this faculty it entirely depends whether
there shall exist in their ruling part any opinion inconsistent with nature and the constitution
of the rational animal. And this faculty promises freedom from hasty judgment and friendship
towards men, and obedience to the gods.
10. Throwing away then all things, hold to these only which are few, and besides bear
in mind that every man lives only his present time, which is an indivisible point, and that
all the rest of his life is either past or it is uncertain. Short then is the time which
every man lives, and small the nook of the earth where he lives, and short too the longest
posthumous fame, and even this only continued by a succession of poor human beings who will
very soon die, and who know not even themselves, much less him who died long ago.
11. To the aides which have been mentioned, let this one still be added. Make for thyself
a definition or description of the thing which is presented to thee, so as to see distinctly
what kind of a thing it is in its substance, in its nudity, in its complete entirety, and
tell thyself its proper name, and the names of the things of which it has been compounded,
and into which it will be resolved. For nothing is so productive of elevation of mind as to
be able to examine methodically and truly every object which is presented to thee in
life, and always to look at things so as to see at the same time what kind of universe
this is, and what kind of use everything performs in it, and what value everything has with
reference to the whole, and what with reference to man, who is a citizen of the highest city,
of which all other cities are like families, what each thing is, and of what it is composed,
and how long it is the nature of this thing to endure which now makes an impression on
me, and what virtue I have need of with respect to it, such as gentleness, manliness, truth,
fidelity, simplicity, contentment and the rest. Wherefore on every occasion a man should
say, this comes from God, and this is according to the appointment and spinning of the thread
of destiny, and such like coincidence and chance, and this is from one of the same stock,
and a kinsman and partner, one who knows not, however, what is according to his nature.
But I know for this reason I behave towards him according to the natural law of fellowship
with benevolence and justice. At the same time, however, in things indifferent I attempt
to ascertain the value of each.
12. If thou workest at that which is before thee, following right reasons seriously, vigorously,
calmly, without allowing anything else to distract thee, but keeping thy divine part
pure, as if thou shouldst be bound to give it back immediately, if thou holdest to this,
expecting nothing, fearing nothing, but satisfied with thy present activity according to nature,
and with heroic truth in every word and sound which thou utterest, thou wilt live happy,
and there is no man who is able to prevent this.
13. As physicians have always their instruments and knives ready for cases which suddenly
require their skill, so do thou have principles ready for the understanding of things divine
and human, and doing everything, even the smallest, with a recollection of the bond
which unites the divine and human to one another, for neither wilt thou do anything well which
pertains to man without at the same time having a reference to things divine, nor the contrary.
14. No longer wander at hazard, for neither wilt thou read thy own memoirs, nor the acts
of the ancient Romans and the Hellens, and the selections from books which thou wast
reserving for thy old age. Hasten then to the end which thou hast before thee, and throwing
away idle hopes, come to thy own aid, if thou carest at all for thyself, while it is in thy power.
15. They know not how many things are signified by the words stealing, sewing, buying, keeping
quiet, seeing what ought to be done, for this is not affected by the eyes, but by another
kind of vision.
16. Body, soul, intelligence. To the body belong sensations, to the soul appetites,
to the intelligence principles. To receive the impressions of forms by means of appearances
belongs even to animals, to be pulled by the strings of desires belongs both to wild beasts
and to men who have made themselves into women, and to a philaris and a nero, and to have the
intelligence that guides to the things which appear suitable belongs also to those who do not
do good deeds when they have shut the doors. If then everything else is common to all that
I have mentioned, there remains that which is peculiar to the good man, to be pleased
and content with what happens, and with the thread which is spun for him, and not to defile
the divinity which is planted in his breast, nor disturb it by a crowd of images, but to
preserve it tranquil, following it obediently as a god, neither saying anything contrary
to the truth, nor doing anything contrary to justice. And if all men refuse to believe
that he lives a simple, modest and contented life, he is neither angry with any of them,
nor does he deviate from the way which leads to the end of life, to which a man ought to
come pure, tranquil, ready to depart, and without any compulsion perfectly reconciled
to his lot.
End of chapter 3
Recording by Shane Greenup www.papersaloud.com